My guest today is John Arnold. John is
probably the most famous energy trader
of all time and certainly the most
successful. One of the things John says
was that he wanted to cultivate and
build the best seat in his industry. The
seat with the best perspective, with the
most information, with the best systems.
What's most interesting about John,
after being the most successful energy
trader of all time, you could argue that
he's gone on to be the most innovative
philanthropist as well. John has applied
this idea of philanthropy to all
different sectors and what's so exciting
about this conversation is it feels like
you're talking to a talented
entrepreneur or a talented operator in
all of these different fields who's
willing to share exactly what him and
his team have learned about what makes
certain problems [music] manifest across
our country. He has an incredible
perspective not just on the things he's
worked on but on his travels, on
companies, on technology. This
conversation is a reminder to me that
cultivating the seat is such a powerful
concept that we probably under invest
in. Please enjoy this wide-ranging
discussion with John [music] Arnold.
Everyone listening I think is somewhat
interested in what's going on in China.
Your lessons that you shared were so
interesting and I'd love you to just
share some of the highlights from that
trip and what you learned traipsing
around, studying robotics, studying AI,
everything else that you did. What were
your major takeaways from that trip?
>> The origination for the trip was
this realization that China's gone
through this transformation unlike any
other that's happened in the world of
both economic and cultural in the course
of 30 years. This is a country that has
gone from you're really trying to
replicate the West to in many ways
leapfrogging it. I was fortunate enough
to spend a week running around, met with
four or five companies a day that were
all very open and kind of got to tour
factories and it was really striking. I
came away incredibly impressed and also
with a lot of questions about what
happens to the rest of the world as the
as this rise of China is happening. The
one big takeaway was just the speed and
scale of which they can do things is
unlike anything in the world. They have
this highly educated population. It's a
very entrepreneurial culture. They've
figured out how to get capital to these
companies.
And they have this deep domestic market.
And so it allows them
to
um kind of build up these supply chains
and agglomeration effects
to create something that I don't think
exists in the rest of the world where I
were talking to a battery company and
asking them are they looking at
replicating factories elsewhere in the
world, and one of their responses was
every one of my suppliers is within 200
miles of here, and I can call them and
meet with them same day.
And you can just can never get that.
And then kind of the scale of labor that
they have and the flexibility. If you
need a thousand workers tomorrow,
you can get that. And again, it is a
skilled workforce that's still very
hungry, that's coming often times from
poverty. And so having this factory job,
which in the West might not look very
appealing, right? For many people in
China, it is highly appealing, right?
It's just kind of the first step up.
And so this combination of things has
allowed them
really to create
this competitive force that the world is
suddenly reckoning with over the past
decade. And it's really interesting to
think about kind of what's the right
response from Western countries, um
you know, that don't want to cede their
markets to China for obvious reasons. Um
but there's there's a lot that China can
offer and so what's the right symbiotic
relationship that the West should be
having with China? I think is this
massive question that
policymakers are grappling with and I
wanted to try to dig into. Which company
visit was the most illustrative of these
big lessons? What was the company visit
that looking back on the trip taught you
the most? I've been fascinated with the
EV market in China, which kind of about
10 years ago was deemed to be a
strategic market.
And you know, the way that the story is
told is that China realized that they
were behind on ICE cars and we're always
be playing catch-up and that if they
could leapfrog to the next technology,
then they could have an advantage on the
rest of the world.
And so right now there's
apparently over 100 different
manufacturers of
EVs in China. Now many of these are
have a contract manufacturer and so you
can send in your design and do your
branding
independently of the manufacturing. But
there's many manufacturers there who
actually have their own plants. So we
went to this one for NIO, which is kind
of the upscale Chinese car that's kind
of in the 40 to 80 thousand dollar
range, although they've recently
released one that's below 10 thousand
dollars. Wow. Going to their factory and
seeing number one how quickly that
factory is built. So they went from you
know, the first shovel in the ground to
the first car coming off the line in 17
months, which was just phenomenal.
And then second, the factory automation
that that they had. And there were
certainly people on the assembly line,
but much of the process
was done via robotics. And you
you know, start looking at what are the
plants that we have the auto plants we
have in the United States. We still have
a plant that was originally built 100
years ago operating outside of Chicago.
Um kind of average age of US plant a
little hard to get, but we kind of
roughly 40 years. Now, they've been
upgraded over time and you know, there
are certainly robotics in American car
manufacturing, but I don't think they
replicate what's happening with robotics
in China. And so they have this
combination of being able to do things
really quickly
with a skilled but low-cost labor force
and then add on the robotics has just
allowed China to
create a quality product at a price that
nobody in the rest of the world has
really been able to figure out yet. Do
you know anything about robotics or AI
that just that surprised you? The number
of robotics companies, there's
over 100 now in China. As I understand
the process, each five-year plan China
specifies certain industries that are
deemed strategic.
And then the head of the province gets
evaluated on a number of factors. You
know, the head of the province is
selected and not voted on. And so
the evaluation is based on things like
employment and GDP growth, but then also
are the industries that are being
created there aligned with the five-year
plan?
And there are also some subsidies coming
down from top on those favored
industries. And so robotics is certainly
one of them.
So then each province takes a couple
companies that it favors and gives them
subsidies and supports
to try to get the winner or one of the
winners to be in their province and then
get the supply chain to develop around
them and then all the associated jobs
and GDP.
And so you get this massive competition
that happens. One of the end results is
that
most of these companies aren't very
profitable today because there's just
intense competition and a lot of times
over capacity
because of the province level subsidies
and supports, but it also creates kind
of uh
yeah, this intense competition which is
a term involution
for it also creates better technology,
right? If you're faced with that type of
competition
to be one of the winners, you have to be
fantastic.
Now, I think the question that China has
is what do you do with those who are not
the winners? And do you have a process
where the losers stay in the industry
and keep kind of everybody unprofitable
with the overcapacity
or are they closed? And so China has you
know, started this new process of
anti-involution of like trying to
support the winners
and make sure that they can build up to
be healthy, strong companies and be
really global competitors and not just
kind of brought down by this
overcapacity in the domestic market.
Obviously, there's tons about of
understanding about what the state of
China wants and is trying to accomplish,
but if you add up all your conversations
with all the people that you met across
the week, how would you sum up what just
the people that you met and interacted
with wanted? Like what it felt like they
wanted and what was their attitude
towards us? It seems sort of
increasingly adversarial from our
direction to them, skeptical, worried
about it, etc. But just adding up your
conversation, what was your felt sense
of what the people wanted and were
trying to accomplish and and felt about
the US? I was struck by just how much
the two countries have separated you
just in you know, since 2019. The number
of flights between the two countries is
down 70%. I talked to a couple expats
who in Shanghai who said that the number
of western expats was down 50 to 75% the
number of American students studying
there is down 90%
and I started to push on this a little
bit about what was happening. Part of it
was when China was starting to develop
and trying to copy the West and one of
the ways to do that was to bring over
Western expats.
And I teach it in a Western business
practices and all the aspects about how
to run businesses and capital formation
and allocation. Those roles, those
learnings have now been domesticated and
so instead of firms, you know,
paying multiples of the cost to bring
over a Western professional to do it.
Those learnings are now domestic
domestic and and so it's cheaper and
they have those skills and so they don't
need the West anymore and that was kind
of one of the the big senses I got is
you know, this
confidence that's building there of, you
know, we we used to try to just copy the
West. Now we're world leaders in many of
these things. We don't need
the West coming to teach us things.
We're going to teach the West. Most
software companies try to maximize your
time on their app to juice engagement.
Ramp does the exact opposite. Ramp
understands that no one wants to spend
hours chasing receipts, reviewing
expense reports, and checking for policy
violations. So they built their tools to
give that time back using AI to automate
85% of expense reviews with 99%
accuracy. And since Ramp saves companies
5%, it's no wonder that Shopify runs on
Ramp, Stripe runs on Ramp, and my
business does too. To see what happens
when you eliminate the busy work, check
out ramp.com/invest.
Every investor should know about Rogo
because Rogo AI's platform is not just
another generic chatbot. Instead, it was
designed to support how Wall Street
bankers and investors actually work from
sourcing, diligence, and modeling to
turning analysis into deliverables. For
me, three key things differentiate Rogo.
First, it connects directly to your
system so it can work with your actual
data. Second, it understands your
workflows, how work really happens
across a deal or an investment. And
third, it runs end-to-end and produces
real outputs the way the best people do.
Auditable spreadsheets, investment
memos, diligence materials, and slide
decks that match your standards. This
all comes from the fact that Rogo is
built by finance professionals for
finance professionals. And it's already
being adopted by some of the most
demanding institutions in the world. To
learn more, visit rogo.ai/invest.
Open AI, Cursor, Anthropic, Perplexity,
and Vercel all have something in common.
They all use WorkOS. And here's why. To
achieve enterprise adoption at scale,
you have to deliver on core capabilities
like SSO, SCIM, RBAC, and audit logs.
That's where WorkOS comes in. Instead of
spending months building these
mission-critical capabilities yourself,
you can just use WorkOS APIs to gain all
of them on day zero. That's why so many
of the top AI teams you hear about
already run on WorkOS. WorkOS is the
fastest way to become enterprise ready
and stay focused on what matters most,
your product. Visit workos.com to get
started. I'd love to rewind the clock a
little bit. I mostly talk to investors
on this show. I rarely have talked to
some of the world's great traders
through history.
At a point in your career, you were
probably the greatest active trader or
one of them, certainly the best in your
market.
I'd love you to describe what it's like
to what what it takes to be truly
excellent at that specific discipline.
If you think back on the time when you
were at I'm curious when you thought
think it was that you were sort of at
the peak of your powers. I'd love you to
just take us in behind the behind the
scenes a little bit of what it took for
you personally to get to that stage
since I talked to so much fewer of of
people that have done this.
I might step back and think about my
kids and what I
think or what I want my kids to do. One
of the big components is do something
that you're really passionate about,
that you want to do, that is not kind of
a job that you do for income. But if you
can have a profession that you love,
that you have this real deep passion
for. And that's what I found with
trading. I just loved the battle, the
puzzle, the game of it. I would sit
there from kind of 6:00 in the morning
to 6:00 at night,
um you know, at the desk and you know,
either staring at the computer screen or
uh
doing some analysis.
And then, you know, go out with people
from the industry that night and then
dream about the industry and you know,
in the shower in the morning I'd be
thinking about it.
And just being so locked in, there were
negatives associated with it. Not sure I
was a great person, a great friend,
um a great partner for those times. Um
but I think just having that like
dedicating your life
to this craft uh for a time period um
was one of the things that I think
separated me.
Uh I think there's also some downside.
There is
um consequences to doing so. Um it's not
the healthiest lifestyle.
It's um not healthy from a relationship
relationship standpoint, not healthy
from a physical standpoint.
Um and I think it's can be mentally
exhausting. And I think, you know, after
doing that for 17 years, kind of this
one thing and being so deeply
intertwined with it, you know, at some
point I just had to like step back. If
you think about like the second or third
best natural gas trader that was active
when you were active, [snorts]
I'm so curious about the difference
between you and them. Another way of
asking like if you turn it into advice
for your kids, which I like that frame
on it, what does it take to be number
one in something versus like number two
and three? I don't know if I thought I
was the best. I felt I was among the
best. I had also managed to create
probably the best seat in the industry.
>> Say more about that. So, my first job
out of college was at Enron. I started
there when I was 21 years old in 1995.
It went bankrupt in late 2001.
Um so then I'm coming out and I'm trying
to figure out what to do.
Uh and there were and I had a bunch of
options. And one is I could have stayed
with the Enron trading floor, which
ended up getting moved to UBS.
Um I kind of decided I wanted to do
something that was a little bit more
entrepreneurial and ended up kind of
deciding to start my own hedge fund. I
had um yeah, I had kind of the classic
hedge fund two and 20 structure.
And you know, now I was there wasn't an
interme intermediary between
me and the 20%. All right, I was getting
the 20%.
And so I had, kind of,
you know, the best or as good of
economics as almost anybody in the
business.
And then we had very good financial
returns early on. And so that did two
things. Number one,
like, [snorts]
there was a lot of retained earnings and
new investors came in. And so we had,
um a lot of risk capital.
And second was
we had a very good investor base that
trusted
the team I had built. Whenever we had a
down month or a down time period, which
we had, they weren't calling to redeem,
but they would call up and say, "Do you
need more capital?"
Um because we had earned their trust and
we had done, you know, forced
distributions along the way.
And so I'd set up this kind of really
powerful seat where I had good
economics, so I could hire the best
people in the business that I knew of.
Um we had a lot of risk capital and had
a very solid and stable investor base. I
like this concept of like developing the
best seat in your in your industry. Are
there any other interesting or useful
components to that? If someone is
listening and they're an investor or or
even a you know, just a normal founder
business person
about setting up the best like
structural advantage in a seat is it
information flow? Is it other stuff? And
I love this concept. We started at 2 and
20. We did very well and had a lot of
more demand for to invest than we had
capacity. We raised the fees over time
and ended up at 3 and 35 by the end.
Um and that allows investment in the
business. And so, you can build up a
fundamentals team that's the best in the
business because you can just pay them
more.
Um you can go do side projects.
Um like trying to get proprietary data
sources
um that give an advantage.
And you can pay the trading team and you
know, the middle and back office more
money. And so, everything in the
business starts to work and you have you
know, the sense of excellence around the
firm.
And that makes everybody better. We're
able to develop kind of proprietary
uh trade entry system and kind of
position management system. So, things
that you don't necessarily think about
but are extraordinarily useful.
Being able to to buy any and all data,
come up with proprietary data sources,
have the best people trying to translate
that raw data into something useful, and
build the best fundamental models in the
business. I think all becomes part of
the flywheel. It's a really scale. Like
it's the redeployment of your scale that
let you do all that and get into all
these fine-grain ways that you could be
better than your competitors. Yeah, I
think that's right. Can you tell me
about the baseball card business that
you built in high school? And I I'm
curious about it because I always wonder
where the initial spark comes from. You
mentioned the importance of passion and
that you just fell in love with energy
markets. I'm curious to sort of trace
why you were entrepreneurial in the
first place, what the formative things
were, maybe where a chip on your
shoulder came from to the extent there
was one, in hearing about that business,
but then also hear the story between
that and and the discovery of passion
for the energy market specifically. I
was
always entrepreneurial. I always wanted
to make a dollar. As a
you know, 13, 14, 15-year-old kid, you
kind of have limited options and
you know, I didn't really want to work
retail and cuz you weren't going to make
very much money doing that. I was
uh in high school in the late '80s,
early '90s, and this baseball card boom
was happening.
And I remember, you know, even in middle
school, first getting started,
introduced into
baseball cards. It was when it was
really kind of starting to take off
around '87. And it became clear to me
that
yeah,
I guess in retrospect that, you know,
this is this really interesting kind of
financial instrument
um that's, you know, very volatile,
that information on pricing is not very
uniform across the market, that there
was a lot of geographic price
differences that were happening.
Uh I managed to talk myself onto this
bulletin board of
of kind of baseball card dealers, which
is when internet commerce is just kind
of getting going and they just had this
wholesale system um
that was kind of real-time pricing in
effect. You know, you'd have people in
New York were trying to buy hockey cards
and people in Texas were trying to sell
their hockey cards cuz there wasn't much
demand for them and, you know,
there was this these arbitrage
opportunities that got created. And I'm
like, uh I I kind of know this from this
bulletin board, you know, people in
Montreal or New York or Buffalo, you
know, are willing to pay X and I can buy
these at, you know, Y and make that
money and the
sports card business kind of really
started to boom and so there was more
and more money coming into it, more and
more cards. I was living in Dallas at
the time but would travel to, you know,
Houston and Louisiana, Oklahoma. Um you
know, started getting on planes when I
was 16 and going to
to big card shows around the nation.
And I just always had this sense of
value of what something was worth at the
time.
And kind of
turns out, you know, it was
there were a lot of similarities between
doing that and the trading. I was, in a
way, doing market making
in in sports cards and I was taking
advantage of arbitrage opportunities in
sports cards
and knowing what
every product is worth at every moment,
you know, kind of stuck with me and that
was my mantra when I was trading gases
that,
you know, I knew what every month was
worth um better than I think anybody
else did and I would do that, you know,
and I knew that every moment of the day.
And to do that it kind of took a intense
focus and just like sitting there and
just staring at the screen and listening
to every trade that happens in the
market, you know, all day long every
day. Um you know, it takes that that
work and intensity. Can you describe the
actual instruments that you were
trading? Like when you were trying to
put positions on and take them off, what
what were those positions, what were
they in on average, and I want to get
into some of the nitty-gritty details
just to give people a sense of how far
you had to go to get an edge in this
world as an analogy for how far you have
to go to get an edge in in anything. You
know, this was the thing you you
enjoyed, but what were you literally
trading at in those days? It was
primarily
futures and swaps that were kind of a
look-alike to the future. I traded
natural gas. The hub for natural gas
trading was Henry Hub in Louisiana.
And then there would be price
differentials between
what gas was worth in Louisiana versus
gas in Pennsylvania or in West Texas or
Colorado, for instance. Uh that's basis.
Uh I did that for a small part of my
career, kind of those price
differentials between one point and the
hub in Louisiana. Uh but most of my
career in trading was trading kind of
what we call the fixed price of natural
gas. And so this is, you know, if you're
watching CNBC and on the ticker, it, you
know, has a gas price, that's what I was
trading.
>> And so in a given day, like how much
volume and activity would there be? Like
how many decision key decisions would
you make in a given day?
So it changed over time. I was for a
long time the largest market maker
in the business, um which I did both for
uh because it was profitable,
as well as, maybe more importantly,
uh it allowed uh ability to put on and
off positions um with lower slippage and
with fewer people knowing what my
position was.
And then also gave me insight into who
was doing what in the market, and so I
could start to build the psychology of
the market. I could, you know, see
certain traders positioning certain ways
and kind of try to reverse engineer what
their thinking was, which helped me in
trying to figure out how I wanted it
positioned.
>> Mhm. May- maybe for those that are less
initiated in the act of market making,
just describe why what it does, sort of
how it provisions like how you're
provisioning liquidity for the market,
but also why you were able to sort of
cover some of your tracks by being that
player in the market. So, a healthy
financial market exists for a reason.
And that reason is that there are
commercial players, in this case
producers or end users,
who have exposure to the commodity
that are willing to pay something to
have somebody else to reduce their risk
to the commodity price.
And they will pay something to the
market
for that risk management.
And if that exists, and so if you think
about a producer of natural gas whose
revenue is almost entirely based upon
what the price of natural gas is at for
a given month or even at the day-by-day,
um there is this huge boom-bust that can
happen because commodities are naturally
kind of have this boom-bust cycle. And
so, businesses then, if you're exposed
just to the spot price or kind of
today's price,
those businesses also go through a
boom-bust cycle.
And so, many businesses will choose to
hedge out
fix some of their
uh their forward revenue and reduce
their exposure to any short-term swings
in the market. So, that's the demand for
hedging.
And if there's demand, there has to be a
supply. There has to be somebody who's
willing to take the other side of that
trade. And some somebody has to
warehouse that risk,
price the risk, and manage the risk.
And in aggregate, kind of that's what
the traders as a whole have to do.
And then there's also speculators that
come in. The people who are warehousing
that risk often
um you know, they have to price that
risk and so they have become experts
in the pricing
and how to hedge it.
And so there's often speculation that
happens on top of that. Um, as well as
there can be speculators who are not
actively market making but just have a
view on
natural gas or oil or gold or anything
and you know, come in and want to put on
a position and again they need liquidity
and so somebody gets paid to provide
that liquidity. It strikes me as someone
that looks at a lot of young companies
that
it is exciting. Energy is exciting.
Again, maybe it's just because of data
centers and AI and the the the new
demand uh, that's coming on stream for
for power.
Does it feel that way to you? I mean, I
know you've you've looked at tons of
companies. I'm sure you're incredibly,
you know, on top of energy markets
today. Do you feel like it's a good time
if you're interested in this field like
you were to go into it relative to 10
years ago when it seemed a little bit
quieter? I think it's more on the asset
side today, but I think there's a
enormous amount of innovation that's
happening in energy assets. So whether
that is in new technologies like in
batteries or geothermal or advanced
nuclear.
I think also kind of all the data center
development and
the amount of money and capital that's
in those fields and so the need for
innovation that if you can make things
even a little
little bit more efficient
there is enormous value that's created
that a new company or a new individual
can take advantage of.
And I think that's you know, one of the
kind of
characteristics of the energy industry
broadly is that it is enormous. All so
if you can have a little edge
in a a niche of the energy industry,
there can be tremendous gains to to had.
And certainly like this mad scramble to
build data centers and to power those
data centers
is creating enormous opportunities for
new entrants to the market. If you're
describing the industry today to someone
that knew nothing about how the US
energy system works,
what would be the high-level way that
you would approach that problem of
explaining it to somebody new? Like here
like here's just kind of the state of
things today. Maybe stepping back about
what are the goals of the energy system.
I think about systems a lot these days
and you know, what the incentives are,
what the rules are, what the goals of a
system are.
But in in energy, you can think about
having a product that's affordable to
the consumer,
that's reliable, that whenever you want
it, you can access it. And you can think
about times where there, you know, the
gas lines in the 1970s or, you know,
blackouts, right, when reliability
hasn't been there.
Um think about having
reduced emissions,
a cleaner system,
um and then kind of energy security.
And then maybe fifth, I'd say that it
creates, you know, good jobs for
you know, whatever country or whatever
locale you're in.
And then, okay, you know, if you if you
have those as goals, then how do you
meet those? You know, America's blessed
with tremendous energy resources, has a
lot of oil, gas, coal, has a lot of wind
and solar resource. Um and then there
is, you know, we're a very innovative
country and so
you know, ability to deploy, you know,
solar
um and wind and thinking about
um both traditional nuclear as well as
advanced nuclear. And so, we have all
these inputs and we're trying to get to
the system that meets those goals.
And then the challenge is
and how do you devise
policy and rules of the system
to do so. And that gets tricky because
those
the priority or the ranking of those
goals changes from administration to
administration.
And it's an industry that is slow. It
takes a long time to build the
infrastructure.
And you need these stable supply chains
in order to be able to meet the needs.
And you have these changing goals of it.
And so the industry gets sent
you know, every four or eight years gets
sent a different set of priorities or
price signals about what we want as a
society.
And then the industry has to scramble.
And then you throw data centers in here,
which is just, you know, a load growth
and being
less concerned about price and more
concerned about speed than any consumer
of of energy that we've seen in this
country maybe ever.
And so put it all in the mixing bowl and
you know, try to get a system that
works. What is, if you could imagine a
US energy future,
I'd love to paint the poles and have you
imagine the best possible scenario you
can imagine for us 10 years from now and
what the components of that system would
be that are different than how it is
today. And maybe like the worst possible
version of the system that you can
imagine in 10 years. Just to get a sense
of having studied the system so
carefully, I love your way of thinking
about the competing goals and this
weird, you know, this weird
data center variable as well. Maybe
starting Well, let's start bad. Like
what would be the worst scenario that
you can imagine that would get you
concerned about the state of the US
energy system in 10 years time or
something. The worst scenario is that
the energy system becomes the bottleneck
for both of
US innovation
as well as you know, individual
flourishing in this country.
And, you know, on US innovation, you
know, especially on on technology and AI
data centers, it's largely around can we
build, can we create the supply that
industry is demanding.
And on individual flourishing, it's, you
know, can we do so
and and maintain and the affordability
and reliability components that
Americans have come to, um,
not only desire but demand.
And there's this politics around energy
and food and housing because we need all
of those, right? Those aren't optional
for people.
Um, but there's this politics around it
that if you start to lose affordability
of any of those, then there is real
tremendous kind of political
ramifications of it.
And so you can start to see kind of if
an energy system that goes bad
will have a huge impact on politics of
this country.
>> If you think about that bad case
scenario both supply and demand-wise,
um, I'm curious, starting with demand,
how
certain you feel that this increase,
this big increase in demand for really
the first time in decades
in the US, how lasting it feels to you?
Does it feel
pretty certain that we're just going to
get a ton more data centers almost no
matter what or demand for them anyway?
And then on the supply side, like what
the reasons would be that we just failed
to meet that demand? Like what why we
would stumble and and just not succeed?
Visibility through,
uh, kind of 2030
is pretty clear. The investments are
being made.
The actors that are making these
investments are the largest, most
profitable
companies that have ever existed on this
planet. They're also, many of them are
growing at very healthy clips and so
their free cash flow is increasing. They
you know, have the financial capability
to execute on these plans and they're
making the investments today.
I think the 2030s on is
who knows? The assumptions that you have
to go into any model on this, you know,
have such wide error bars and you
extrapolate out that many years and you
just
create a garbage in garbage out model.
And what about our ability to meet that
demand? What would screw us up on the
supply side most? I think it's policy.
It's gotten harder and harder to build
in this country over the years.
And there's always this tension between
what the needs of society are and what
the preferences of a local community
are.
And so everybody realizes we need
transportation and housing and energy
uh
but all people also want it not in their
neighborhood.
And so this is the whole NIMBY movement
is yeah, we need affordable housing or
workforce housing. We need and a
transportation. We need energy assets.
But don't put them by me and if you try
to, I'm going to go fight you in the
courts.
And for developers, time is money.
The opponents to projects have gotten
very clever about how to use and have
the existing regulatory laws to delay
and delay projects and in doing so can
often kill them. I've been very
uh focused, you know, through our
foundation at you know, how do you do
a permitting reform to make sure that
the projects that are good, that are
good for society as well as aren't
unnecessarily painful to any community
will get built. While maintaining kind
of the parameters that the bad projects
don't get built. Just NIMBYism and this
difficulty in building
is what would you know, lead to the
problem of not being able to supply or
the energy becoming the choke point for
development of the United States.
And particularly kind of bringing it
back to the first part of the
conversation of China and just the speed
and scale that they can build. They
don't have this problem. I'm confident
of that.
And so, yeah, it is uh one of the
biggest differences between the two
countries. And I I really worry about,
you know,
if energy becomes a choke point in the
US, you know, it has real ramifications
for the strategic ranking of this
country. If you're a politician, would
you use the China story as fuel to the
fire to try to communicate and market
this concept that we're sort of getting
lapped by someone that's sort of our, if
not adversary, our competitor?
>> 100%. Yeah. Um, you know, not only is it
a good narrative, but it's true. If
energy becomes the constraint, we will
become less competitive vis-à-vis China.
>> If I was an uh and you mentioned the
asset side being so exciting on the
energy side,
if I was a energy asset investor and I
really wanted to fund stuff that would
help us solve this problem where you got
the joint growth in demand and this rise
of NIMBYism,
where does this whole thing break down?
Like, is it in transmission? Is that the
problem? Cuz presumably, if we could
just produce lots of energy in remote
places that nobody lived or cared and
transport it efficiently, the problem
would be solved. Is that the right way
to think about it? Do you think about it
differently? I I want to get towards
this like the best version of things you
could imagine, you know, in 5, 10 years'
time that would solve this problem and
make us energy, you know, abundant and
not slow. Transmission is certainly a
component of it. It It's not the only
component. We can talk about supply
chains, can talk about land use. um, but
transmission is a huge component of it.
Uh, I actually started a company, um,
about 5 years ago trying to build
interregional transmission lines because
it was an industry that had become so
difficult to permit and build that
uh, that kind of private capital had
largely given up trying to do new
projects.
And it's one of the kind of solutions
that
can be a win-win-win for everybody.
We're not talking about the goals of the
system, right? It can reduce costs, it
can increase reliability, it can reduce
emissions, it can make, you know, the
country more secure, it can, you know,
create more jobs. But yet,
yeah, it gotten so hard to build these
lines. It is still very hard to build
these lines that,
you know, most of the developers who had
gotten started with projects in the
2000s kind of gave up. They started
things
uh, thinking these were going to be
5-year projects and they were 10-plus
years in and many of them hadn't broken
ground yet. Again, this is part of the
challenge of America, it just takes so
long and part of this is, you know,
there's not one entity that can just
say, "Okay, do it." You have to There
are multiple veto points along the way.
Um, and you have to convince a lot of
different actors of this project. I
talked to a lot of politicians, a lot of
federal politicians, on both sides of
the aisle. Um,
and
one of the things I hear from almost all
of them is this need to figure out how
to permit and build
faster and more efficiently in the
United States.
So, there's very broad agreement on and
at the top level.
You know, you can get disagreements
about kind of the details about how to
go about that. I think I'm remain
reasonably optimistic that we can get
federal permitting reform done this
year. It'll be probably the only
bipartisan legislation that happens
besides maybe a budget, but there is
this will
that I sense
uh that is kind of unlike any other
issue in DC right now is that there is
this realization that
this this can't set the country back.
And you know, people will look at it for
different reasons. Again, people will
have prioritized goals in different
ways. So, how can you do a bill that
helps all of those goals? And that's
what we're shooting for. What do you
think about nuclear both new forms of
fission, but also the you know, the
panacea potential of fusion? Promising,
but very very difficult. The innovation
hasn't been proven. We can build
you know, the AP1000. The AP1000 is kind
of the the latest of the in a
traditional
nuclear power plant. We know what's a
very very costly electron. It was the
last power plant to be built nuclear
plant to be built in the United States
finished I think in 2024.
Vogal units three and four are AP1000s
and a very advanced um safety
uh design for a nuclear power plant.
Um
you know, the Vogal plants were
enormously expensive. Um and if anything
they've gotten harder to build since
then because they require a very
significant amount of labor in
generally rural parts of this country.
At its peak
uh Vogal had 9,000
uh laborers on site many of which were
highly skilled craftsmen.
And trying to do that today in the
United States is very difficult. Um but
we've proven we can build that. We know
it's a
a high cost. And so there's a lot of
effort
to do advanced nuclear. And that's
either kind of the um SMR, small modular
reactor, that's fission,
or through fusion. And I think the
question is we don't know what the
economics of either of those are. And
one we
don't know whether we can build a
commercial fusion
uh unit. I think there's a lot of
optimism in the industry.
Remains to be seen whether we can get
there or not.
Um I think the greater question is what
are the all-in economics of that? And
that's a big unknown. Because at the end
of the day, you're competing in a
commodity market. And we've seen that
we're willing to pay a little bit more
for a cleaner electron,
um but we're not willing to pay a lot
more for a cleaner electron. So, it has
to be cost competitive.
Um optimally, it is, you know, the
cheapest electron is one that minimizes
emissions.
And so, I think that's the promise
of of nuclear. These aren't coming
anytime soon. Even, you know, there are
some pilot plants that are um
being drawn up today.
Um
you know, they may or may not have
started construction on some of this. I
think
most of these announcements are kind of
for the PR. By the end of this decade, I
think we'll be have taken some small
steps there.
But we're probably looking 10, 15 years
to really have advanced nuclear be at
any scale in the United States, and
that's best case. As your business
scales up, everything gets more complex,
especially your compliance and security
needs. With so many tools offering
band-aids and patches, it's
unfortunately far too easy for something
to slip through the cracks. Fortunately,
Vanta is a powerful tool designed to
simplify and automate your security work
and deliver a single source of truth for
compliance and risk. There's There's
reason that Ramp, Cursor, and Snowflake
all use Vanta. It frees them to focus on
building amazing differentiated products
knowing that compliance and security are
under control. Learn more at
vanta.com/invest.
I know firsthand how complex the tech
stack is for asset managers and
seemingly every new tool and data source
makes the problem even worse adding more
complexity, more headcount, and more
risk. Ridgeline offers a better way
forward, one unified platform that
automates away all that complexity
across portfolio accounting,
reconciliation, reporting, trading,
compliance, and more all at scale.
Ridgeline is revolutionizing investment
management helping ambitious firms scale
faster, operate smarter, and stay ahead
of the curve. See what Ridgeline can
unlock for your firm. Schedule a demo at
ridgelineapps.com.
What do you think about the basket of
startups that have been launched and
raised in some cases a lot of money
about the prospects of good returns for
those dollars that are going into
these companies and projects either
either today or the historical dollars
that have gone in
the last 5 years.
So, it's surprised me. In some ways I
thought
that some of these technologies were
almost uninvestable
from kind of the the VC side because of
the
such a long duration to get to kind of
really a kind of free cash flow
business. I'm surprised at how much
money. I think it's fantastic. Um I
think this has to be a public-private
partnership where the government is
putting in real capital into these
because I I don't think they make sense
as a kind of stand-alone investment
without public support.
And I just the the time frame to
commercial deployment, the amount of
money that has to be raised for it
um and
the the fact that you don't
you don't really know early on
whether you're making progress or not.
There's a a of benchmarks to be
overcome.
Um
but until you actually build one,
you don't really know what your
economics are going to be,
what your efficiency of the unit's going
to be. I worry that there's going to be
a falling out in the industry.
Um there's probably too many
uh SMR companies and it would be better
if the industry can and of coalesce
around three or four different
technologies and focus the resources
there. It's a scary circumstance to
imagine as an investor when funding
dries up and free cash [clears throat]
flow is still over the horizon, not even
within, you know, the visible horizon or
something. I'm curious if there are
other areas that you think that's less
true, like solar and battery seems like
a really interesting way of solving some
of the problems in the energy markets.
Uh the cost curves for both look really
cool and interesting. I'm curious what
you've learned about those two and just
kind of generally what you think about
that style of energy generation and
storage. Solar has two trends. One is
technology and manufacturing costs keep
going down. The main technology is
improving, manufacturing costs are going
down, so the end product of a solar
panel
Mostly in China. keeps getting cheaper,
mostly in China.
And so the cost to develop a solar panel
keeps falling.
Now, a solar panel doesn't get you what
you want. You want electrons
at the location that load is at. And so
there's
a lot of steps to go from a solar panel
to electrons in the right location. Some
of those are inflationary, right? The
panel itself is deflationary,
but it requires land, it requires uh
labor, it requires access to
transmission, it requires, you know,
access to capital and the cost of
capital, which you know, was falling for
a long time and has now been increasing
really over the past 5 years.
People love to talk about kind of the
cost of solar panel and usually whenever
you see these graphs, it's what's the
cost of the panel and it's just kind of
from top left to bottom right. That's,
you know,
and
meanwhile, I know the cost of a PPA, a
power purchase agreement for solar is
well off the lows. We were kind of lows
happened around 2020 and it's the cost
again of delivered electrons from solar
is, you know, probably 50% plus more
expensive than they were at the cheapest
point in 2020.
And it's because the panel itself again
becomes a smaller and smaller percentage
of the total cost of the system.
And so any advantage, you know,
continued technological improvements or
manufacturing improvements are just
getting at a smaller and smaller
percentage of the total cost and
meanwhile, the inflationary aspects of
the system,
you know, become a bigger and bigger
percentage of of total cost. That being
said, there's a lot of ideas about how
to bring load closer to where the solar
is being generated and, you know, can
you use some type of, you know,
automation, factory automation or
robotics to
kind of build the plant better, the
solar field better and cheaper way that
requires less labor. And so there are
advancements being done. It's good to
see that a lot of the data centers now
are being yeah, that the developers or
the end users are, you know, signing new
PPAs with with the solar developers and
so we've seen a tremendous amount of
solar come onto the system.
I think it's also true that and I,
you know, generally in a stable demand
environment,
each megawatt of solar that comes on is
worth a little bit less. The most
valuable solar that came on was the
first megawatt and then you get to a
point where the supply of solar has
exhausted the demand during the sunny
parts of the day in a certain region.
And so as you bring on more solar,
either you have to also bring on
batteries or you have to bring on
transmission to move it to a different
place.
And so that has a cost. Battery costs
have been declining as well. I wonder if
some of the same dynamics that happened
with solar will start happening with
batteries soon. As the technology is
getting better, the manufacturing gets
optimized,
you start running out of kind of the
advancements that have significant cost
uh ramifications for the battery system.
And
it becomes more and more on what the
input costs are. And so we've seen
lithium prices, for instance, just in
the past few months be up more than 50%.
And that's going to translate into
higher battery costs, all things being
equal. It's fascinating that it all
comes back to the same problem of like
labor. Can we build these things? Can we
build them quickly? Permits. Um a lot of
our attention as a country maybe should
just be there. And we could sort of take
for granted these falling cost curves,
which are great, but not sufficient to
have the the end system that we want. If
I was forcing you to invest in something
related to the proliferation of data
centers today,
I'm curious how you would attack that
problem. So much excitement around these
things, lots of companies that are
predicated on the rise of data centers
and the buildout of data centers.
What would it take for you to get
excited about investing in something
that was tied to that trend? There's a
number of companies that are trying to
kind of
make the buildout of the data center a
less labor intensive through robotics.
That's an interesting source.
It could be a very crowded space though.
So it remains to be seen how good an
investment that robotics companies will
be. From an energy standpoint, I think
advanced geothermal is one of the most
interesting components of the system
today.
It is a base load energy source that is,
you know, friendly to the environment.
Um
it is coming down the cost curve. It's
still very early in this industry. Um
so, still it's unclear what costs are
going to look like in a few years, but
there is, you know, the skilled labor
force that exists in this country
already. It comes largely from the oil
and gas sector.
And
you know, it the technology has now been
proven out. Um it's There's a lot of
work to do to scale this.
It's kind of like early on in the shell
gas or shell oil revolutions that, you
know, it just starts out small because
these companies have had to prove out
the geology, have to prove out the
techniques, have to prove out the
management team.
And
and you have to
uh get to the project finance market in
order to get a very low cost of capital
to make these things really work.
And so, it takes time to get from kind
of start up in the industry and even
kind of getting all these steps proven
to getting to where, you know, banks are
willing to loan you money because they
know it's going to work and they know
they'll get repaid. But, I can
see kind of in 5 years that the
geothermal industry could be uh the most
exciting in the United States.
We've talked a lot about energy
infrastructure specifically. Are there
other parts of US infrastructure,
non-energy, that interest you most? The
housing discussions that are happening
across the nation are really
fascinating. And a lot of the YIMBYism,
or yes in my backyard, as a combatant to
NIMBYism, you know, originated in
California largely because California
had some of the highest housing costs
and the fastest growing housing costs
and some of the
the most stringent restrictions on
trying to build new housing. And it had
gotten so bad that there you know,
started to be this
uh pushback against all of that.
And what we've seen is similar to
permitting reform, there is this has
become a very bipartisan issue of make
it easier to build housing. And we see
it from, you know, not only California,
but you see it in Montana, you see it in
places like Austin and and in the
Northeast. And so, it has kind of
superseded politics.
And I think politicians are now
realizing that this affordability issue
is front and center for voters.
And that's driving, you know, this
renewed focus on cost of electricity,
renewed focus on
uh cost of groceries, and on housing.
And so, people are asking their mayors,
governors,
um federal government, "What about
housing? What are you doing to reduce
the cost of housing and make it easier
for people to buy that first house?" And
if you don't have a response as a
politician, you're just not going to win
a race these days. President Trump came
out and made this comment about, "Well,
I want housing prices for those who have
a house to go up." He also talks about
making it more affordable to buy a
house. And so, you know, you can't do
both unless there is just a massive
government subsidy. And I think that's
one of the risks of this affordability
push is that
it's been decades in the making
um from all these regulations, all these
restrictions on building things in this
country. There aren't easy solutions to
overcome this
besides just big subsidies. Right? That
the real solutions take time. And the
problem is that that window is longer
than the political cycle. And so, you
know, if you're a politician and you're
facing re-election every two or four
years,
you have to have an answer
today about what am I doing that you can
actually see
in during my term.
And one of the easiest thing to do there
is if you have access to the budget,
which, you know, the federal politicians
do, you just start subsidizing things,
which makes the problem worse in the
long term, but, you know, the electorate
likes it in the short term. I love to
apply your sort of system thinking to
some other areas that you've studied
carefully and been in really involved
with with the foundation. But, before we
do that, maybe to have you describe your
goal for the foundation overall. One of
the things I've heard you say that's so
interesting is that foundation should
get less powerful over time. Uh
individual foundations, that is. And as
someone that's running a big one, that's
an interesting interesting thought. I'm
curious why you think that. So, yeah,
maybe before getting to some of the
things that you focus on, just frame why
have a foundation if you just wanted it
to get weaker over time. Any institution
gets less effective over time. I think
it's true of companies, I think it's
true of countries, or, you know,
governments. I think it's true of
foundations. That, you know, you have
your
best, most innovative times when you're
still relatively young as any
organization. And so, I'm very cognizant
of, you know, some of the downsides of
having perpetual foundations, and that
they or one of the roles of a foundation
is to take risks that the private sector
and governments aren't incentivized to
take. There might be political risks, it
might be economic risks.
And
the foundations can provide
because there's less accountability on
foundations, they can provide that
capital and resources to try things that
others aren't willing to do.
But those are risky. Often times those
will fail.
And
I think organizations become
more bureaucratic, more risk averse
over time. And so they're not able to do
one of the main functions of a
foundation. There's this
difference between
charity and philanthropy.
Um you know,
charities often, you know, designed to
meet in the short term needs and
philanthropy
is more on
you know, trying to create long-term
solutions. We do both of those. We're
mostly on the long-term solution side,
but you know, we also
give money to our local food bank. We,
you know, give money to help the the
local hospital. It's harder work. It
requires having bigger staff.
Uh it requires
um having a a longer time frame and
being willing to live with ambiguity and
likelihood of failure on many of the the
things that we're doing.
You know, I talked about
the easiest money to raise is a
university that's going to build a new
building because a donor, you know, has
trust in that institution.
And they know that if I give a dollar
that you know, I can point at the brick
that my dollar went to and you know,
sometimes you even have your name on
that brick. And so you see directly, you
know, like where your money's going. A
lot of the work that we do, which is
um based on
trying to improve these big systems in
America, whether that is the health care
system or the criminal justice system or
infrastructure, uh our public finance
system, uh education.
You know, it is long-term work
and progress is slow, but we really act
as
this
conduit between researchers and policy
makers and trying to like
you know, do this experimentation
and
do evaluations and research about what
works and what doesn't in these systems
and help people think about new ideas
and how would you test them and how can
we translate into something that's
useful for policy makers to improve the
outcomes of these systems.
>> What about criminal justice? Like
describe your work in that part of the
world. What progress have you made? What
progress do you think needs to be made
to that system? We first got involved in
this.
We just started passively funding the
Innocence Project. And you know, the
Innocence Project tries to go look at
cases of you know, people that have been
convicted of a crime and you know, do
new DNA testing on some of the evidence
and see whether that
evidence that was used as part of the
conviction actually points in you know,
to them as the perpetrator of the crime
or not. And
the Innocence Project has been able to
overturn many, many, many convictions.
And you know, there's a lot of very sad
individual stories there. But I think
most important
from the Innocence Project is they're
really looking at and know, what was
this process that led to this wrong
conviction
and how do we improve the system to lead
to fewer
incorrect
prosecutions and and convictions.
And so they were using the individual to
try to improve the system.
And with that entry we started looking
more and more into criminal justice
system and we heard a lot of anecdotes
about some of the
inefficiencies or failures of the
system. And so,
we kind of, you know, took a step back
and say, "Okay, where can we try to help
in the system?" And there was a lot of
the
uh kind of crim- criminal justice
principles um
came from the great crime spike that
happened in the '60s, '70s, '80s in this
country. It culminated with a bipartisan
crime bill under Bill Clinton in the
early '90s that was really about getting
tough on crime. And it was about kind of
increasing the penalty
um for if you're caught doing things.
And meanwhile, the researchers have kind
of known for years that what's more
important than the penalty, you know, if
and when you're caught, is probability
you get caught. A lot of people who are
who are committing crime, you know,
don't have that you know, the ability to
process if I get caught, will I have a
5-year sentence or a 10-year sentence,
and that's going to change my behavior.
of it is more is am I going to get
caught or not? And then there was, you
know, lots of questions about
um things like how do you do pretrial
detention, right? This time between when
you're arrested for a crime and this
time when you're convicted in courts of
a crime, and what should happen to you
in that time frame.
And so, like we
got asked to come into um New Jersey to
help them think about that. And you
know, Kentucky, you know, a Republican
state was one of the first to really try
to redesign the system when their
existing system was deemed
unconstitutional. And so, thinking about
what's important in that decision
process, and what many states have
decided is
what's important is, you know, are you a
threat to others?
And what's the likelihood that you're
going to come back for your trial? And
that should decide like do you need to
be detained before you're convicted of
the crime or can you kind of be be
released back into the community? And
meanwhile, we have this cash bail system
that's largely based upon do you have
money to post to get out or not? We've
worked with a number of states, both
Republican and Democratic states over
the years trying to think about and if
how do you, you know, align the process
with what the goals of society are?
This kind of criminal justice reform
um
movement has
had its ups and downs. We were
one of the very few philanthropies that
was looking at it when we got started um
close to 15 years ago
um particularly on the adult side.
And then it became a very popular
um
uh
movement and a lot of the people that
were coming into it were coming in from
a social justice and racial equity
perspective. And I think one of the
things that distinguishes us is we
always try to think about and what are
the all the goals of the system? Well,
you know, there's the goals of the
criminal justice system, right? First
and foremost, you can never lose public
safety on it. So, any reform you do, you
know, can't have a trade-off of public
safety.
But, you know,
social justice and racial equity are
certainly goals in that system. We look
at a lot of of ideas about how to
improve it and we try to
um figure out what are the trade-offs
that exist, try to quantify them to the
extent that we can, try to figure out
you know, are there trade-offs? You
know, if you do one thing,
you know, it could improve so social
justice or racial equity, but there
could be a trade-off on costs or
trade-off of public safety. Do you think
that the best place to improve things is
just that probability, subjective
probability that you'll get caught? Like
is that where we should invest using
technology especially invest, you know,
the outsized amount of our time and
attention cuz it seems
>> [snorts]
>> all it takes is one case if some guy's
probability is low so you let him go and
he commits another really bad violent
crime or something and everyone freaks
out and says shut this down. Like uh
it's like nuclear like three Three Mile
Island happens and then you know, we get
no nuclear forever. Um does that mean
that we should focus our attention on
making people more scared that they'll
get caught
as the number one lever in the system? I
think so. The way you do that in a
society where number one we
there's not the public funds at the city
level to really significantly increase
the number of police.
Um
and second is that communities are
hesitant to have a lot more police in
their neighborhood.
>> Yeah. Right. It's this kind of weird in
that you know, communities don't want to
lose the police they have Right.
>> but you also ask them they don't want a
lot more police coming in. You know,
this and the status quo bias associated
with it.
But and so you kind of the question is
like you know, if you don't have a lot
more money and
um communities don't want a lot more
officers just kind of walking around
then then if what's the solution? And I
think there's a lot of interesting
technologies that are being developed
and and there's
there's always this trade-off about then
if security versus surveillance, right?
And or security versus privacy.
And I think this is one where you kind
of each community has to figure out
where they want to be on that spectrum
and different communities are going to
choose different different
uh equilibriums there. You walk down
Midtown Manhattan might be the most
surveyed place in the United States,
right? And it's also one of the
wealthiest and then you know, I've been
in the real-time crime center in Beverly
Hills and
and cameras everywhere and they have
drones and you're just everything's
being filmed.
Um and so like the wealthy communities
have decided we want this and we're
willing to trade some of our privacy for
security. Meanwhile, like a lot of the
debate happens like um the assumption is
that
uh low-income people don't want that and
that they want more privacy at the
expense of security. And I think there's
real questions about that. You see kind
of the positive response that people
have whenever crime goes down and the
privacy that we're willing as
individuals to give up on the internet.
Right? In order to get something we
like, right? The rewards of the
internet. We're willing to to give a lot
of our privacy. And so, I think there is
this broad rethink now about kind of
this trade-off and what tools are
available and how to use the tools that,
you know, don't lose the trust of the
public and that, you know, minimize the
chances that people are going to misuse
any of these tools. What about education
as something upstream of of [snorts]
crime? Is there have you observed or
discovered in your work
uh useful or interesting relationship
between those two things? And how do you
think about the system of education as
well? The first issue we got involved in
was K-12 ed because the outcomes there
are associated with kind of almost any
outcome you could think about that
matters, whether it's
um you know, drug dependency or you
know, economic outcomes or criminal
outcomes.
>> is strong. Like better K through 12
equals better outcomes.
>> Yes, there's a strong correlation,
right? And then you try to like, okay,
is there causation here, right? If I can
improve the education outcomes, does
that change? And I think, you know, um I
think the answer is kind of generally
yes. I think the hard part is
how do we improve educational outcomes?
And that's the question kind of United
States has been struggling with for
decades.
Um and
we've been able to do it a little bit
as society, um but we haven't we haven't
cracked that nut. What's maybe
surprising is you know, this is true
globally as well. We've worked with a
number of charter schools, worked with
Teach for America over the years.
Almost every country around the world,
you know, that has a
significant K-12 system has come to
America to try to figure out what we're
doing because they're facing the same
challenges on education that we are.
What makes you most hopeful in that
area? I had Joe Leman on the show
talking about Alpha School last year.
That that seems young but extremely
promising in some of the early results.
Uh I I always have to try to catch
myself to be
not too overly optimistic about
technology solving all of our problems,
but it it sure does seem like
AI could solve a lot of the problems in
education, maybe. I'm curious what you
think.
I think there's a lot of promise. I
think there's promise in Alpha School.
What my hesitancy to get too excited
about is
we've been hearing this promise from the
EdTech industry
for 20 years now. We've adopted more and
more technology in the classroom over
that 20 years, and outcomes have gone
down.
And you talk to any of these providers
of an EdTech platform,
and they have all this data they're
going to show you about the remarkable
results that they get from their
students.
And then you step back, and you just
never see it in the actual data,
you know, applied in the real world. Is
that kind of like the solar thing where
the solar, you know, the AI system is
the equivalent of the solar panel? Like
it's getting better and better and
cheaper and cheaper, but that's not
actually the thing that matters. It's
more like the rest of the stuff in the
system. I think there's a question of,
you know, how do you engage
with kids? You know, often times kids
have short attention spans. It's
probably more true today than it's ever
been. And we can all probably think back
about some remarkable teacher that we
had that just captivated us and kept our
attention for the full 60 minutes of a
class. And we can also think about
teachers that were just terrible, and
you know, you wouldn't pay attention at
all.
And I think part of the challenge has
been that sitting there staring at a
screen
often times just has not been an
engaging format for people.
And the question is, you know, can this
some combination of
AI plus
AR or VR try to create some type of more
engaging
um both content as well as the delivery
of the content uh that we haven't seen
before. And so I I think there's promise
there. I want to be optimistic, but
again like I'm so frustrated with the
lack of results that we've seen from
this field for decades with you a lot of
promise being there for a long time and
just seeing nothing. I feel greedy
asking you about all these different
systems, but there's two more that I
really want to hear about. Uh those
being health care and journalism, uh
which is one that that I'm I'm
personally interested in, of course. Um
maybe starting with health care.
Uh this everyone knows the headlines
stats, you know, the percentage of GDP
that that health care represents has
ticked up steadily over time. Outcomes
uh in many cases haven't gotten better.
There's some countervailing things like
GLP-1 seem to be sort of a a modern
medical miracle of sorts that can
address some of these problems and cost
in the health care system. When you
assess that overall system, where does
your attention get drawn? What are the
things you've discovered are most
interesting and important? We've had
this kind of multi-decade
financialization of the health care
system. And that's really driven up
costs as you know, people have figured
out, you know, ways to get in, start
businesses, or consolidate businesses
and take advantage of, you know, some of
the regulations that exist in the field
to maximize firm profits. And you know,
the health care
um it violates kind of every principle
of a uh competitive market from econ
textbooks. You know, thinking about,
you know, even
what information does the patient have?
What information does the payer have
versus what are the incentives of the
provider who has kind of this asymmetric
information advantage and also, you
know, gets to decide what treatments you
need. And so, you can load up all these
market failures onto the system
and that requires
this huge system of regulations to try
to overcome that.
And so, you know, if there were no
market failures, then you could just
say, like, okay, like, no need for
government policy here, government
regulation, we step back. But with all
the market failures,
you need books and books and books and,
you know,
tens of thousands of pages of regs about
how to deal with every certain thing.
Um, and you have, you know, a
third-party payer, whether the
government or a private insurance
company for the vast majority of the
system.
And so, you creates all these rules that
then private industry will naturally try
to seek and find out where's
where's the gap in the rules. And this
happens in every industry. Right now,
one of the big things is skin
substitutes. So, if you get a burn, you
need some type of new skin on um,
there's regs about how those get
reimbursed and
the first 6 months whenever a product is
released, they are
there's, um, not history of the halos,
that product's been priced before, so
the federal government gives a
lot more latitude on how
a manufacturer of that product can price
it for the first 6 months. And then as
the market starts to react, after 6
months, the government now puts more
regulation on price. So, what
manufacturers have done is,
you know,
introduce a new product, let it be out
there for 6 months, take that off the
market, introduce a new one that's
slightly different, you know, and the
prices, you know,
keep going up and there's, you know,
some  kickbacks. It's just an
example of this cat and mouse game that
constantly happens on, you know,
you know,
um government or private industry writes
a regulation and then everybody tries to
figure out how to beat that. And so, a
lot of our work is,
you know, trying to identify these and
trying to correct and make the rules and
incentives of the system be more aligned
with the outcomes we care about as a
country. As a general matter, not just
in health care, but in all of these
systems that you've studied,
is is it a conclusion that fewer rules
are better? Do you find yourself pro
deregulation as a general
matter?
Not necessarily. This is one of the
reasons why
I don't feel at home necessarily with
either political party because I think
different problems need different
solutions and
we are going to have a health care
system that has,
you know, third-party payers forever.
Um and the need for very tight
regulation. And, you know, if you look
at K-12, for instance, um you know, it's
a very different system, very different
actors in the system and
um you have fewer market failures and
you can have
maybe less regulation and you can
regulate different things. You can
regulate outputs rather than inputs in
the system. And so, you know, I've been
very favorable to
um having the government try to get out
of service being the service provider in
K-12, right? That, you know, the
government doesn't do a great job of
being both the regulator and the service
provider that a traditional district is.
And that the government needs to choose
one of those, and so it's not, you know,
is regulation good or bad? It's, you
know, different systems need different
types of regulation. And there's always
going to be this cat and mouse game
between
regulators and the private actors. And
we need to make sure that the
regulators, you know,
you know,
both do a good job of devising the rules
of the system up front and then are
actively, you know, fixing it as they
fail. Finally, what have you learned
about journalism? It's it's a kind of
one that stands out in contrast to some
of these other, you know, massive
countrywide systems that that you've
studied and explored and and done things
in and around. What about journalism
have you learned and what what does it
need?
>> We got drawn to journalism
um because,
you know, view it it's called the fourth
estate, that it's, you know, a check on
both government and on private actors.
Um that there is a public good of, you
know, both
the dissemination of information,
um as well as kind of the investigative
um journalism that that many outlets do.
And trying to find the frauds and abuses
and wastes that are happening.
And, you know, for a long time you had
this package product of the daily city
paper, and that's been largely the
um you know, has fallen apart. And so,
the kind of that role of, you know, both
coverage of local and state politics as
well as kind of a lot of that
investigative work,
we feel is being under invested in.
And the commercial
uh revenue potential of that is limited.
Our view is that there is a need for
philanthropy to fund some of this. The
same way that philanthropy funds the
opera house and museums, you know, and
parks that having a vibrant journalistic
outlet
to oversee a lot of these things is
that's necessary for a a vibrant
community. You get to see so many parts
of the system probably more than almost
anyone I've ever talked to.
What has you the most excited about the
world? Innovation.
It's very easy to get pessimistic. It's
very easy to talk about the problems, to
talk about the debt and deficit and all
our political dysfunction.
Um and then you kind of step back and
look at what
this country's gone through
since its formation and the number of
challenges it's faced and that it's been
so robust in being able to overcome
those challenges historically.
>> [snorts]
>> And you know, the innovation that that
many have provided and created over the
years and how that's improved quality of
life for us and I think that's what we
have to trust and have faith in will
continue to do so in the future.
When I do these interviews, I always ask
everyone the same traditional closing
question. What is the kindest thing that
anyone's ever done for you? When I was
really deep into trading and about how
it kind of created some unhealthy habits
and started to change me. At one point
my brother pulled me aside and just said
like you've changed and not for the
better. Took courage on his part to do
and
and I think it caused me to step back
and think about did I agree with that or
not and if of course like the the first
instinct is to say no, you're wrong and
then you know, that thought lingers and
you know, start trying to see yourself
as a third person would.
Um and
and I started to think like
you know,
maybe he's right and what do I need to
change in my life and you know, try to
make these other parts of my life
besides the business
make the other parts of my life, you
know, high performing as well. I love
the closing idea that saying something
hard to someone you care about can be a
great kindness. A cool and unique
answer, John. Thank you so much for your
time.
>> Great to be here. Thanks.
>> [music]
>> Most software companies try to maximize
your time on their app to juice
engagement. Ramp does the exact
opposite. Ramp understands that no one
wants to spend hours chasing receipts,
reviewing expense reports, and checking
for policy violations. So, they built
their tools to give that time back using
AI to automate 85% of expense reviews
with 99% accuracy. And since Ramp saves
companies 5%, it's no wonder that
Shopify runs on Ramp, Stripe runs on
Ramp, and my business does, too. To see
what happens when you eliminate the busy
work, check out ramp.com/invest.
As your business grows, Vanta scales
with you, automating compliance and
giving you a single source of truth for
security and risk. Learn more at
vanta.com/invest.
Ridgeline is redefining asset management
technology as a true partner, not just a
software vendor. They've helped firms 5x
in scale, enabling faster growth,
smarter operations, and a competitive
edge. Visit ridgelineapps.com to see
what they can unlock for your firm.
OpenAI, Cursor, Anthropic, Perplexity,
and Vercel all have something in common.
They all use WorkOS. And here's why. To
achieve enterprise adoption at scale,
you have to deliver on core capabilities
like SSO, SCIM, RBAC, and audit logs.
That's where WorkOS comes in. Instead of
spending months building these
mission-critical capabilities yourself,
you can just use WorkOS APIs to gain all
of them on day zero. That's why so many
of the top AI teams you hear about
already run on WorkOS. WorkOS is the
fastest way to become enterprise ready
and stay focused on what matters most,
your product. Visit workos.com to get
started. Every investor should know
about Rogo, because Rogo AI's platform
is not just another generic chatbot.
Instead, it was designed to support how
Wall Street bankers and investors
actually work, from sourcing, diligence,
and modeling to turning analysis into
deliverables. For me, three key things
differentiate Rogo. First, it connects
directly to your systems so it can work
with your actual data. Second, it
understands your workflows, how work
really happens across a deal or an
investment. And third, it runs
end-to-end and produces real outputs the
way the best people do. Auditable
spreadsheets, investment memos,
diligence materials, and slide decks
that match your standards. This all
comes from the fact that Rogo is built
by finance professionals for finance
professionals. And it's already being
adopted by some of the most demanding
institutions in the world. To learn
more, visit rogo.ai/invest.